Imagine hiking on a bowl-shaped hill: a paraboloid.
The gradient shows the direction of steepest uphill.
We set up axes, the surface z = x^2 + y^2, and a ground grid.
Pick a radius r and angle t on the ground to choose a point.
Lift that point up to the surface along a vertical line.
Draw the contour circle r = const on the ground.
The red arrow is the gradient on the plane; it points radially.
The cyan arrow is tangent to the contour; it points along the circle.
Notice the right angle: gradient is perpendicular to contours.
Let the point orbit once: watch the directions as t increases.
The gradient always aligns with the radius of the contour.
And the tangent arrow stays orthogonal to it everywhere.
Increase the radius r: we move farther from the peak.
The slope gets steeper outward: |∇f| grows with r.
Another lap: orthogonality still holds along the whole circle.
Reframe the camera to see the climb direction clearly.
Green arrow: the steepest ascent on the surface itself.
It tilts upward and projects to the red gradient on the plane.
Bring the radius inward slightly: the slope decreases.
Yet the ascent direction still aligns with the gradient.
One more orbit: gradient stays radial, tangent stays circular.
Contours are level sets: all points of equal height.
The gradient points in the direction of fastest increase.
And it is perpendicular to every level set it meets.
Summary: Gradient = fastest increase; Contours = constant height.
On this paraboloid, ∇f points straight outward on the ground.
That outward direction lifts you uphill the quickest.